Good morning.
Welcome to session 205, I/O Kit:
PCI Drivers & Open Firmware.
My name is Mark Tozer.
I'm Desktop Technology Manager.
Today we're going to go over a
couple areas here with I/O Kit,
specifically with the
PCI driver development and
assistance in also determining
how to get into open firmware,
what to look at open firmware.
We'll actually have some demos of looking
at a couple of PCI cards and actually
looking at the open firmware code there.
So today we'll start off the
morning with Wayne Flansburg
who will give this presentation.
Good morning.
Let's begin.
We think the session audience should be
people that are interested in generic
PCI cards and hardware developers.
And we think the audience also might
include people that are writing drivers
for that and hardware testers and just
people that are generally interested
in low level PCI stuff and booting.
So what is a generic PCI device?
Well, it doesn't belong to a framework.
That's the biggest thing is you
don't have a FireWire framework or
a USB framework or any framework
at all except I/O service,
which is quite a lot.
Your device is unique
to your application.
Nobody's going to try to install
their driver or run their
application onto your device.
Your device could be a sonar device,
a radar device, something that isn't
Mark Tozer-Vilchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin, Jason Seng
So the session agenda is basically
we're going to look at OpenFirm,
we're going to boot a device.
We're going to boot one computer.
We're going to stop in the
OpenFirm or user interface.
And we're going to look at some devices
and we're going to look at some support
nodes that are important to you.
And then we're going to go and
look at the same stuff over again,
but this time using the I/O registry.
And then we're going to talk
about a generic PCI driver and
finally we'll have a Q&A session.
[Transcript missing]
So we're going to start
with the open firmware.
The device tree,
we're going to look at nodes in there.
We're going to look at
configuration variables.
Configuration variables have some
very important aspects for you that
we'd like to talk to you about today.
And we're going to show you how to,
from open firmware user interface,
using your reg properties,
how to actually read
your configuration space.
And we're doing this because we want
you to be able to get a new computer,
plug your device in there,
and make sure before you do
anything that your device is
recognized and built correctly
into the open firmware device tree.
And we're going to mention
something about security.
So the device tree is a block
diagram of the motherboard,
but it's more.
As I mentioned earlier,
it has the support nodes in it,
but it also, OpenFirmware,
during its building of the device tree,
goes out and looks at all the PCI slots,
and if it finds a card in there,
builds the node for you
or allows you to build it.
And in there you have your properties,
your words, and if you have children,
they'll also show up in there.
Your words are only present,
they're optional,
if you have a device that is
participating in the boot process,
such as an Ethernet
device or display device.
Mark Tozer-Violchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin, Jason Seng
this is a block diagram of the
target machine we have up here.
This is one of our
latest desktop machines,
and we're not going to
boot it up entirely,
but when you buy this machine,
you can get the developer note for
that machine off of our web page,
and in that developer note,
you can look at this block diagram.
The reason this is important to you is
many people will come to DTS and say,
with this last machine,
my device stopped working.
What did you change?
Well, you don't really have to ask us.
We're going to try to teach you
enough so you can get a reasonably
quick look with knowing very little
about open firmware and everything
else so that you can see what may
have changed and start from there.
So we're hoping to give
you some leverage there.
Now we're going to display your node.
We're using Telnet to do that.
Last year we used Telnet.
This year we-- or last
year we didn't use Telnet.
This year we're using Telnet and we're
going to show you your whole tree,
including your node,
from the Mac OS X host system
that is connected up to it.
And like I said earlier,
we'll display your words, properties,
and children, if you have children
and if you have words,
but you definitely have properties.
This is from the PCI bus
binding to IEEE 1275.
It's just one section that we took out,
but it's extremely important.
I'd like to talk about
that just for a moment.
This is difficult to read,
so I'm not going to go
into it in great detail,
but what you see here is the bits.
From 00 to 31, and you see FIS high,
FIS mid, and FIS low.
FIS high is really very,
very important to you because it is
how all the bridge controllers route
messages from your virtual memory
space on the host bus down through
the hierarchy of ASICs on your bus.
Forgetting this N, P,
and T thing that are there
for a lot of legacy devices.
You have a space code,
which is either configuration space,
memory space, or I/O space.
But you also have 8 bits for your bus.
So you can have 256 buses,
and you can have 32 devices on a bus,
and you can have 8 functions per device,
and you can have 256
registers per device.
So how do we get that
message down to you?
We set it down to you in FIS high.
And we put that out onto the PCI bus,
and the controllers know
enough to recognize that this
message that's coming down,
and they got one clock period to do this,
30 nanoseconds today I guess.
They got one clock period to
say that this is not for me,
or this is for me,
or it's for my children.
And if it's for my children,
it changes the type of message
and sends it down through
the bridge to the network.
So that's how we get there.
And then FIS mid and FIS low
are the 64-bit addresses.
Presently, we only have a 32-bit bus,
but the standard allows for
going to 64 bits in the future.
So today you'll see that all the H's,
the FIS mid, is always 0.
and now I'm going to ask
Steve Martin to come up and demo
using Telnet in a host computer
What we've done here is we've put
a machine in Open Firmware already.
Open Firmware,
we're at a pretty low level.
We don't really have the ability
to cut and paste or scroll back up.
And we don't have much of a
way to save any of our data.
What we've done with this machine
is we've used the Telnet app on 10
in the terminal program to link back
in to the Open Firmware machine to
give us an interface that allows
us to save and capture our data.
So what I'm going to do here is what
Wayne was showing on the slide above.
I'm going to select the root node
of the device that we're looking at.
and that's the dev is the word that
select that used is used to select
our device and I'll list that and
what you can see here is that this
is roughly a representation in text
of the same hardware block diagram
that Wayne was showing before.
We have children,
those are the indented text and we'll
go down here to where is it right about.
Here is our PCI bridge and we have
two cards on this machine and they
show up right here and right here.
We'll select that one.
[Transcript missing]
Note here that we have the vendor ID,
the device ID, and the revision ID.
Are we going to go to the
slide that shows the... No,
I don't think so.
Mark Tozer- Okay.
Well,
I want you to note those and we'll go...
Use a word that is actually,
we've got a Q&A up on it,
it's QA 1036 called Cregs,
that will put this in a format that you'd
be used to seeing in a configuration
register dump from your card.
And we'll use Fizz High,
this is Fizz High right here under the
Reg node that Wayne was talking about.
So I'll use that fishigh to start
this word as an input for this word.
That's one.
That's .crigs.
There you go.
And you noticed here in the block
diagram up above that the vendor ID
and the device ID are the same
as the first two entries here.
This is in a format that comes
right out of the PCI spec.
and Wayne, you want to?
Yeah, let's go back to this machine,
which is two.
Let's go to the next slide.
This is the PCI configuration space.
Now that demo we just showed you,
it's difficult to show a demo like
this to an audience for the first time,
but we do have the demo replicated,
as Steve said,
on the site so you can stop
on your own and look at it.
You as a PCI developer must supply a
PCI configuration space of 64 headers.
The blue ones are mandatory.
So the device ID and the
The device ID and the vendor ID are,
as you saw, in mine.
[Transcript missing]
The end input parameter
on the stack for .cregs.
And if you look at this
before you go any further,
if you just get into the
Open Firmware user interface and
go down and do this kind of stuff,
and you find out that
This doesn't look like
I thought it would look.
Don't boot.
Don't go any further.
The damage is already done.
And it's very important that you
know how to see that your device tree
was built correctly because OS X or
any client of open firmware believes
that the device tree is correct.
And if it isn't, then the game's over.
So let's look at some of the support
nodes that are going to-- oh,
wrong thing.
Some of the support nodes.
I'm going to have Steve,
we're bouncing back and forth
because you've got to talk about
this stuff and then show the example.
Steve in a moment is
going to do printenv.
For the Unix people out there
you've probably noticed that dev
and slash and ls and now printenv
looks a lot like Unix stuff.
and we're going to look at
those words that word and we're
going to look at three of the
Mark Tozer-Violchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin, Jason Seng
Is that what you wanted?
Yes.
What got printed here was all
the configuration variables.
These are the open firmware configuration
variables and they're mentioned in
IEEE 1275 and in that PCI binding.
And you'll see things that
are probably important to you.
Some of these are.
One of the devices,
there's two columns here.
One column, the far column,
is what's stored in boot ROM,
factory defaults.
The other column is current.
So if you were in OS X and you
were in the terminal app and you
started setting some configuration
variables and you wanted to see
that those were actually set,
you could shut the machine off,
boot back into open firmware,
and type printenv.
Print ENV and you can see what
the current values are and in
fact if you set it correctly.
We're going to be looking at boot device
later with the boot picker because
that's also a very important device.
It's the only one that's off scale over
there and the real important thing is
that that comma separates one from the
other and it's a very important device.
and we'll tell you more about that later.
One other one that's important too,
a lot of people want to know about
what is and what isn't in NVRAM.
NVRAM is in here and because on this
machine it doesn't show anything,
there isn't anything in NVRAM.
And even if we were to put
something in NVRAM right now,
that script would not be used unless
you set the use NVRAM RC question
mark variable to turn it on.
So let's look at the aliases node.
The importance here is that open firmware
has to be able to move down a path.
And the path, when it looks at a
string that you give it,
it's either going to start
with a slash or it isn't.
If it starts with a slash,
it's an absolute path.
But you can see some of
these paths are terrible.
And if we stood up
here and tried to type,
we'd die of old age before
we maybe got the right one.
So these aliases are very important.
But there's a caveat with aliases.
And that is that the aliases on
one machine might not be the same
aliases on the other machine.
And although you can create your own,
and we expect you would if you were doing
a lot of booting and stuff like that,
you need to check this.
So devalias is another command.
And all of this stuff,
we're not giving you anything that we
haven't put out on the internet already.
So there's two other nodes
that are very important.
And that's the chosen
and the options node.
But let's look at the options node first.
One of the things you'll notice on
your own spare time is what we did
was we dev down to the options node
and then we listed the properties.
But when we said printenv,
we saw these properties.
So printenv is a nice way to
print the environmental variables,
but they're really
configuration variables and
they live in the options node.
And you need to know that
because people don't.
And it's very important and you
can very quickly see what are
your configuration variables.
The other node that's of
importance is the chosen node.
You wanted us to do something?
When we're done, we put stuff that we did
for you in the chosen node.
The Mac Address.
Every Ethernet card has
to have a Mac address.
So you stuff your machine with
Mark Tozer-Violchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin, Jason Seng
This one.
I don't know which one that points to,
but at least that's the one.
This machine has never
been set up entirely,
but your boot path and
your boot arguments,
if you had them, would have been there.
So those three nodes, the
The choices node, the chosen node,
and the options node are
all very important to you.
[Transcript missing]
When Open Firmware boots up,
if you're holding down the command
option PR keys for parameter RAM,
which would set those defaults
back that I showed you for
the configuration variables,
Open Firmware first checks to see if the
amount of memory you have in the machine
is different than when it's shut down,
i.e., you had three sticks when you shut
down and now you only have two sticks,
it will unset the security for you.
The good news is that it comes benign.
If you don't know how to set it,
you can use the machine forever
and it will never bite you.
It will always just sit
there and do nothing.
So that's a good feature of it.
[Transcript missing]
If you have a number of
SCSI devices out there,
and if there are SCSI people here,
I have to ask you afterwards
to come up and see me.
And I want to get your business card
and give you my business card because
Paul's group has a request of the SCSI.
They want a new feature
placed into the SCSI drivers.
Whenever Open Firmware goes out,
it doesn't know it's connected to SCSI.
So if you have a bunch of
SCSI devices connected up,
it's going to have to go,
"Are you there?" 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, oh,
nobody's there.
"Are you there?" And it's got
to do it a number of times,
and that adds considerable to
the amount of time to boot.
Basically,
the firmware goes off and looks at the
boot device configuration variable,
and it goes out there and
tries to use it first.
And also, since Open Firmware is
not connected to SCSI,
it's going to have to
do it a number of times.
And that adds considerable to
the amount of time to boot.
Basically,
the firmware goes off and looks at the
boot device configuration variable,
and it goes out there and
tries to use it first.
And so it's not using interrupts.
Although Command Period, I think,
will tell the boot
picker to stop picking,
looking for boot devices,
Command Period won't
be honored instantly,
because it might be out
waiting for a SCSI device.
But when it's done,
it comes back to see if
there were some key presses.
So basically,
the boot picker displays the Rescan
and the Boot buttons and searches the
device tree for all the bootable volume.
volume.
Very interesting address.
This is a hybrid syntax in this.
Remember the slash said it
was an absolute address.
That's the PCI.
That's the node name.
The @8k is the unit address.
That's in 1275.
I think it's in section 3.2.1.1.
This slash says now I'm going
down to the Mac I/O chip,
which is the chip that goes out and has
all the ATA drives and everything else.
And it's at that unit address.
Then it goes down to this
ATI drive at that unit address
and comes all the way down here.
And then,
This part of it here,
notice you have forward slashes
and back slashes from here on out.
Mark Tozer-Violchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin, Jason Seng
[Transcript missing]
and he's going to basically show you the
The I/O registry and its planes.
This is another very,
very important aspect.
The device tree in OS 9 mapped
pretty close to the name registry,
but the I/O registry is much more.
Mark Tozer-Violchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin,
Jason Seng The I/O registry
and its planes.
This is another very,
very important aspect.
The device tree in OS 9 mapped
pretty close to the name registry,
but the I/O registry is much more.
Jason,
show them the IO Registry Explorer,
please.
[Transcript missing]
Which options did you want to highlight?
One of the things I needed to learn, yes,
one of the things I needed to
learn was objects and classes.
Who supported whom and where
did you get your providers from?
So let me switch back over
to my machine for a second.
And you want to determine
who your provider is,
and you want to determine your class,
and you want it to read some variables.
And you're inheriting,
because you don't have a
framework of particular importance
like FireWire or something,
you're inheriting from I/O Service.
But you can be provided
by I/O PCI device,
AGP device, PCI Bridge,
and Cardbus device.
And for all the PCI knowledgeable
people in the audience,
those are all PCI devices.
So show them the I/O Ridge with
a minus B so we can see the
BOL properties and a minus P so
we see the I/O device tree plane.
No need to worry if
you're not a C++ expert.
I'm not.
I was immediately able to find the
objects in the tree because they
supplied me with the -b option.
And I'm also seeing
who's providing for me.
That's a big, big help.
All we want to do is get you
started because we know that
most of the questions that
you're asking right now is,
"How do I get started?" Once you've
got all the information,
we get talented PCI devices all the time.
Jason, show them I/O PCI device.h.
And then that'll be it.
We'll go into the next
part of the session.
And the headers you'll be
interested in are the IOPCIDevice.h,
IOPCIDbridge, IOAGPDevice,
and the Cardbus headers are
in the kernel framework.
Show them the,
show them that header file,
iopcidevice.h, the bottom header file,
right there.
Go down to the FISHI strut.
There it is, right there.
Get that strut right there.
Remember how I showed you?
Fizz High.
Look at it.
Nine never had this.
Ten has it.
There it is.
And it's in Little Indian and Big Indian.
You don't even have to
get out of bed anymore.
I was told not to be talking like that,
but I guess I won that one.
Well that's it.
I'm not going to talk
anymore and Jason and I are
going to get off the stage.
And we're going to turn
the podium over to Josh.
Good morning, everyone.
My name is Josh de Cesare.
I work in the Mac OS X CoreOS group
on various things,
but primarily I've been working on
platform architecture and various
aspects of how I/O Kit interfaces
with the rest of the kernel.
And today I'm going to talk to
you about how you can write a
lot of the things that you would
use to write generic PCI drivers.
So, in writing a generic PCI driver,
you're going to have to pay
attention to several things,
including how your driver
gets matched in the system,
both active and passive matching,
how you initialize your driver,
how your driver would process events,
also how you would create a user
client so that you can handle
requests from various sources.
Now, also,
since you're not part of one of the
built-in frameworks that we provide,
you're going to have to design
the interface between your
application and your driver.
So we need to talk a little
bit about how that's done.
Additionally,
we also want to tell you a little bit
about how to deliver your driver so
that it'll be there when you need it.
First off, we're going to talk
about passive matching.
So in your driver, there's going to be an
Info.plist file that contains all
the properties that describe your
driver to the rest of the system.
One of those properties in there
is the I/O Kit personalities.
You'll have one personality
for each way your driver works.
And all the personalities
have some similar properties.
For matching,
the important properties are
things like the I/O Provider class,
which tells the system
what kind of device you're
interested in being attached to.
In the case of most of your drivers,
you're going to be interested
in having your I/O provider
class be I/O PCI device.
Tell the system that you're
only interested in PCI devices.
You're not interested in getting
attached to USB devices or block devices,
just the PCI devices.
I/O Name Match will allow you to have
your driver matched against the name,
compatible, or model properties that
OpenFirmware or the Fcode for your
device left in the device tree.
So if you know that your device
in the device tree is going
to be called "My Company,
My Device," you can use the
I/O Name Match to do that.
Additionally,
the different provider types can also
provide their own kinds of matching,
and IOPCI family does that as well.
It has several kinds of matching.
There's IOPCI match,
which lets you match on some combination
of the device and vendor IDs.
There's also a primary and secondary
match that allows you to match
exclusively against either the
sub-vendor and sub-device IDs or
the regular vendor and device IDs.
There's also an IOPCI class matching
key which allow you to match
against certain classes of device.
So if you were writing a
USB something or other,
or USB host controller,
it would have a class code and
you could use that to do that.
But mostly what you guys are going
to be using is either the IOPCI match
to use the vendor and device ID,
or name match if you have Fcode that
puts a particular name on your device.
There are also other possible
matching keys and you can
find those in iokitkeys.h.
The other major property you're going
to be interested in is IO Probescore.
Probescore allows several phases of
matching to be adjusted in which order
the various drivers are going to get
attempted to attach to various devices.
You can use the probescore to
say that your driver should be
given preference over another.
In the case that your company has
two devices that are very similar,
maybe same device and vendor IDs,
it might have other variances,
it might have other properties,
or various things going on.
You could use IO Providerscore
to help make sure that one
driver wins against the other.
Both would potentially still
have the chance to run,
which is what we're going to
look at next in active matching.
So one thing to keep in mind about
the passive matching is it's passive,
meaning that your driver
didn't get to run any code.
Active matching is different.
You will get, your driver will be loaded,
it will be linked into the system,
and it will be given the opportunity
to run your probe method.
Now, the thing you note at the bottom
there is it's not normally needed.
Most devices, or most drivers just
don't need a probe method.
You can do what you need to get your
driver loaded using the passive matching.
So what does probe allow you to do?
It allows you to access
your device's hardware.
But that also means
that when you're done,
you have to make sure that you
leave your hardware in a safe state.
You don't want to leave it such
that it's going to be trying to
interrupt the system or holding the
bus locked or any other strange stuff.
You have to make sure that you
left it in a safe state when you're
done because some other driver may
also get the opportunity to probe.
You must free any resources you've used.
If you allocate any large chunk of
memory or attach to various other
providers in the system or hold locks,
you need to make sure you release all
of those because some other driver
could get probed after you get probed
and it turns out they might win.
So you want to make sure that
you've left everything else okay.
Another thing you can do with Probe,
and this is one of the more important
things that Probe does for you,
is it can allow you to bind multiple
devices to a single driver instance.
Most people don't need to do this,
but there are certain multifunction
PCI devices that the two functions
serve different purposes.
Say the first function is a video device,
the second function is an audio device,
but you want them handled
by the same driver.
So by returning one driver instance
for both of the two Probes,
you can get that bound.
And I've got an example
of that that's in Darwin,
and I'll talk a little bit more
about where to find that later.
Just want to reiterate again,
probe is not normally needed.
You can do almost everything you
need to do just using property
matching from the passive schemes.
So now that your driver has been
matched and the system decides that
you're the one that wants to try,
you're going to get started.
One thing to remember is that
start can also be used as an
even later version of probe.
Since almost every driver
will have a start routine,
you also have the opportunity
of returning false from your
start routine to say that
you're not actually interested.
Again,
sort of the same rules apply with probe.
If you did allocate any resources,
you need to make sure to let
them go and make sure your
hardware is in a safe state.
So we're going to focus here on a driver
whose provider is an I/O PCI device.
Now this I/O PCI device, the nub you get,
provides you access to your hardware.
It provides it in several forms.
It provides a way to get mappings
for memory space and I/O space.
And these are done through
a couple of these methods,
the Get Device Memory with
Index or with Register,
also I/O Device Memory.
Now I've got a lot of these class names,
property names,
or method calls coming up.
And we're going to try to make sure that
these slides are available for you later
so you don't have to copy them down.
And these will just serve as sort
of crib notes for later when you're
trying to go through and figure
out how to put it all together.
So for configuration cycles, as you saw,
there's the Cregs demo earlier
that lets you look at what your
configuration registers are.
You can read and write your configuration
registers by using the config.read32,
write32,
and various other methods on your NUB.
[Transcript missing]
So once you've figured out how
you want to map your device,
you need to figure out how it's going
to be used by the rest of the system.
And we have several classes
that will help you do this.
In particular,
these are the I/O Work Loop and the
various I/O Event Source subclasses.
and the subclasses that are likely to
be most useful for you are I/O Interrupt
Event Source and I/O Filter Interrupt
Event Source for event processing,
Timer Event Source for timers,
and I/O Command Gate is sort of a
catch-all that lets you sync stuff up.
There's also the I/O command pool.
Sort of helps you manage
resources for within your driver.
And I/O's register service helps
you make your driver available
for the rest of the system.
So a little more on register service.
So when you call register
service on your driver instance,
your driver will get it added to
the matching system and the matching
system will come through and try
to find all the devices that might
be interested in attaching to you.
Now most of the time you're not actually
going to have other drivers attaching to
your driver because you're sort of the,
you're what we call a leaf
node in the service plane.
Mark Tozer-Vilchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin, Jason Seng
Also can be used to let other
drivers in the system know
that your driver is ready.
You might have two different devices
for your product and you want to make
sure that one driver references the
other or will wait for the other.
So you can have the second driver do
wait for service and that will come back
or stop blocking as soon as the other
driver has called register service.
So after your driver's been initialized,
you want to be able to process events.
So here's a little bit more about
some of these classes that we
provide for event processing.
So the I/O work loop allows
you to serialize access to all
of your driver's resources.
It's meant to simplify everything.
Keeps you from having to have
tons of little locks to lock this,
lock that.
It also makes it easier
to access your hardware.
You don't have to worry that two threads,
one maybe a client thread,
maybe your thread, are accessing your
hardware at the same time.
As long as you use the various
accessor methods through the
various event sources or work loop,
you will not have to worry about
having two threads try to talk to
your hardware at the same time.
The work loop also provides a thread
for various I/O event source actions.
We'll talk about that a
little bit more later.
and the work loop also supplies
itself as a choke point when your
clients need to tell you to stop,
they're not ready to receive callbacks,
or other things in the stack need
to tell you to stop for a moment.
So each of the event sources can
be added to the work loop and any
time an event source fires and
says that it's got something to do,
the work loop will serialize any other
outstanding events to make sure only one
of these is happening at any given time.
and each of these event
sources will execute an action.
This action will normally be
executed on whatever client
thread generated the trigger,
but they can also happen
on the work loops thread,
but only one at a time.
So, in a little bit more detail
on the types of event sources
you're going to be using,
primarily if your PCI device
is likely to have an interrupt,
you'll want to have some way of
getting at it easily in your driver.
We do provide lower level interrupt
services that will let you control,
enable, and disable on your interrupt,
register interrupt handlers,
but we do suggest that you use these
higher level constructs because they
will simplify many things for you.
The two types of interrupt
event sources we have are the
basic interrupt event source,
it's a proxy for the device interrupt,
it makes it so you don't actually
have to talk to the device interrupt,
you'll get notified when things happen.
It also handles behind the
scenes enabling and disabling
your interrupt as required.
And the action will get--
so when an interrupt occurs,
this action will happen on a thread.
You don't have to worry about
running an interrupt context.
So when this thing does happen,
you can block if you have to.
You can allocate memory if you have to.
You can take locks.
You don't have to worry about running
in a very restricted environment.
The one thing to keep in mind with
the I/O Interrupt Event Source is
that if you've got a level-sensitive
interrupt like a PCI device would,
when your interrupt
happens in the hardware,
the low-level interrupt controller
stuff will process this interrupt
and cause a thread to get scheduled.
In the meantime,
your interrupt will be disabled.
So if other interrupts
come in for your device,
they won't be able to do anything.
You won't get notified of them happening.
Until your interrupt action finishes.
So if you want to have the ability
to take multiple interrupts
at once from your device,
or potentially if you're sharing
an interrupt with several devices,
if you've got a single PCI card
that has a bridge on it and then
several of your devices behind it,
they'd be sharing the
one physical interrupt.
So to make sure that one device can
get an interrupt while the other one's
processing an interrupted thread level,
we provide this
I/O Filter Interrupt Event Source.
It has the same basic features as a
regular I/O Interrupt Event Source,
but it also allows you to
supply a filter function that
runs at the interrupt level.
Now,
in that this is a real interrupt handler,
you cannot allocate memory,
you cannot take locks,
you cannot do anything that
would otherwise block the system.
Otherwise, the system will deadlock.
Now what this filter function does
allow you to do is quickly interrogate
your hardware to determine whether
or not the interrupt is for you.
Also it allows you to say
process the interrupt.
If you can process the interrupt very
quickly you can do that and you may
not even have to send this interrupt,
cause the interrupt action to
cause your work loop thread to go.
You can,
in a lot of cases where you might want
to do that is if you're implementing some
sort of software DMA where you have a lot
of high frequency interrupts coming in,
you just want to quickly take
a bite off of a FIFO and put
it into a buffer somewhere.
And maybe when your buffer
is starting to approach full,
then you might want to decide that
you should cause your interrupt
action to fire and let the
higher level parts of your driver
process the rest of the interrupt.
So there's also the
I/O timer event source.
You can use it in two ways.
The first way is a lot easier.
It's basically to schedule a timeout.
Suppose a client issues a transaction
in your driver and you want to make sure
that after some number of milliseconds to
seconds that a notification is sent back
up to say that it just didn't complete.
You can, at the same time that you issue
the transaction to your hardware,
you can also set up one of
these timer event sources.
When the timer event source fires,
it gives you an opportunity to see if the
transaction is done or if it isn't done,
you can set an error up.
Now one thing to keep track of is that
these timer event sources are one shots.
It won't get rearmed unless
you explicitly rearm it.
So if you're going to attempt to use
one of these for a periodic timer,
you need to, after every time it fires,
you need to rearm it.
Another one is the I/O command gate.
This isn't really like
a lot of the others.
It doesn't have an explicit
action attached with it,
and it doesn't really have a trigger.
But it does have a way for you to
execute any function as if it were
being executed by your work loop.
Now it's not going to get shuttled
over to the work loop thread.
It'll execute on whatever thread
you've called the function on,
so it's efficient.
But it will block if necessary
in case the work loop is in
the middle of doing something.
This allows you, in many cases,
to take an I/O request coming
into your driver that could be
happening on multiple processors
or in many different ways,
and schedule the function that
actually causes the I/O to be put
into your driver by saying run
action command on your command gate,
and it will get serialized appropriately.
The command pool is mostly a helper.
It's not likely to be used
by most of your drivers,
but is there if you need it.
Basically, it lets you allocate
some number of commands.
Each one of these commands would
hopefully have the total amount
of memory needed to process
completely one of your commands.
At the same time,
you don't want to pre-allocate too
much memory since every piece of memory
you pre-allocate isn't going to be
available for the rest of the system.
This is an important notion
if your driver is somehow
related to the paging path.
Because if the paging system is trying
to free up memory or put stuff on disk,
there's no memory to be allocated,
you can't be allocating memory in
your driver while it's doing that.
The I/O command pool can be told to block
when there isn't anything available.
Also, it can be set up to just return
you an error to say that there is
no memory available at this time.
And you can, if you wanted to,
return an error or you could
block on some other higher
level construct in your driver.
It's also synchronized with
a work loop to make sure that
things don't get out of sequence.
So now that you've got a basic
notion of the classes that are used
to process events in your driver,
you need to figure out what sort
of event or how you start getting
these events to your driver.
So there's a couple ways to do that.
One of them is basically generic,
sort of generically
through property access.
The other is through user clients.
Now the property access stuff is done
through basically gets or sets on
properties in your driver's dictionary.
And this is a very easy thing to do.
It's connectionless.
There's no clients to think about.
It's kind of high overhead because
as you come from outside the kernel,
it has to get wrapped
through a serialized,
it's actually a chunk of text.
It comes into the kernel,
it gets parsed again,
and created into a dictionary.
And consequently,
it's also rather low bandwidth,
but it's easy.
To make your driver participate in this,
the two methods that you need to
override are serialized properties.
This allows you to find out when somebody
is trying to get properties from you and
potentially return different properties.
Also, set properties allows you to take
or accept a dictionary from user
space and then add it dynamically
into whatever dictionary.
Now, if you're doing a more
complicated system,
you're probably going to have
to use an IO user client.
They're somewhat more complicated,
so we're going to be trying to
provide some examples for you,
give you a baseline of what to do.
It's connection-based,
so you'll always know who
all of your clients are,
you'll know if clients go away,
and you'll also have everything
you need to serialize clients
to make sure that they're not
trying to talk to you all at once.
It's very low overhead,
and it can be very high bandwidth.
It allows you to map memory from
a user process into the kernel's
address space if necessary.
You could DMA into the buffers,
you could copy memory around,
you can do pretty much whatever you need.
You can also export new
API through to user space.
And the major property that you need
to be interested in for doing this
is the GIO user client class key.
Basically,
you add a new property to your driver's
dictionary that says the name of the
class that should be instantiated
when a user client request comes in.
So how do you access
your application from,
or your driver from an application?
And this is done pretty similarly
for Cocoa or Carbon applications.
Ultimately, they would have to link
against the I/O Kit framework.
And how this linking is done is a
little bit complicated depending
on whether you're Cocoa or Carbon.
If you saw the
I/O Kit overview on Monday,
there was some stuff where you
had to have a CF plug-in and
various other things in between
to get back and forth between the
Mac OS context and CFM context.
But it boils down to you link
with the I/O Kit framework,
it provides you all the APIs that
you need to shuttle back and forth
across the user kernel boundary.
It also provides a set of
matching functions that you
can use to find your device.
After register service has
been called in your driver,
these user space commands will
be able to find your device.
Now if you're trying to use the get and
set property interfaces to your driver,
the two functions that you're going to
be interested in using from user space
are ioRegistryEntryCreateCFProperties
and ioRegistryEntrySetCFProperties.
These allow you to pass a dictionary
from user space into the kernel
and have it end up going to the
driver in the set properties.
Or if you're getting,
it allows you to ask the kernel
to provide you a dictionary from
serialized properties in your
driver that you can then use.
Now if you're going to be
creating a user client,
after you have found the device,
you'll want to use I/O Service Open,
which will cause in the kernel the
user client class to be created
and you can then go from there.
[Transcript missing]
Mark Tozer-Violchez, Wayne Flansburg,
Josh de Cesare, Steve Martin, Jason Seng
So the other topic we need to
talk about is driver delivery.
So now that you've got a driver,
you need to figure out how
to get it into the system.
This can be done in a couple of ways.
The standard driver format that
you're going to be using is a KEXT.
It's the standard CFBundle.
It has the usual properties in it.
The two that are very interesting for us,
of course, are the Info.plist file
that gives the properties,
including the I/O Kit personalities.
And there's also the
binary for the driver.
So this whole thing is directory-based.
It's not a flat file,
which makes it rather difficult
to put in the ROM on a PCI card.
So we've also provided another
method for storing drivers.
This is a .mkext.
We call it a multi-kext.
It can contain multiple KEXTs.
Normally, for your device,
you're only going to be putting
one KEXT inside your mkext.
It turns into a flat file.
It's compressed.
It's also checksummed and is
very easy for use in a ROM.
It only contains an
Info.plist and a drivers binary.
So how do you create this .mkext?
First thing you need to do is you
need to strip the debugging symbols
and local symbols from your driver.
This will reduce the size
of your binary by about 90%.
It will also simplify things.
You don't have to worry about other
people looking at your debugging
symbols or gaining other information
about the internals of your driver.
To do this,
you use the strip command with the dash
lowercase x and point it to your driver.
It then goes through and removes
everything that isn't needed.
It's very important to do this because
obviously the ROM space in your card
is limited and this will greatly extend
the size of the driver that you can,
the actual working size of the driver
that you can put in the ROM in your card.
So how do you create the mkext?
Well, first you have to run,
after you strip the driver,
then you can run this
mkext cache utility.
And this utility will take a KEXT or
potentially a list of KEXTs and
put them inside your driver,
and create an mkext out of them.
It will compress them and
checksum them to further
reduce the size of your MCaxed.
Now that you've got an mkext,
you need to know what to do with it.
So this involves the Fcode that
you've written for your driver.
Now Mac OS X uses basically
the same Fcode as Mac OS 9.
Really there's only optionally two
properties to add that are needed.
and these are the driver, APL, Mac OS X,
PowerPC property that's very similar
to the Mac OS 9 version of the
driver from that you're used to.
It's a property in the device tree.
You use encode file to put it there and
there's an example there of what a sample
string for how you would create it.
This causes the entire contents
of the mkext to be created as
a property inside your driver,
or inside the driver's properties.
Now this can take up a lot
of space in the registry,
so one way you can get around this is by
using the driver-reg/apl/macosx property.
This would just be a reference in
the property list for where to find
the driver in your expansion ROM.
Now obviously you have to have
an expansion ROM to do this,
and unfortunately there aren't any
good tools to do that right now,
but it is possible to do and in the
future we hope to have better tools.
Another topic I just wanted to
briefly mention is firmware updates.
So if later,
after you've already released your card,
you want to be able to
update the firmware,
this is a sample of one
way you could do it.
There are many different
ways you could do this.
And I want to talk about this a little
bit because it is different than 9.
Obviously in Mac OS X you can't actually
access your hardware from an application,
you have to go through a driver.
So this means that the
hardware access done to,
say, flash the ROM on your card,
has to be done by the driver.
The firmware update application
just turns into a pretty front end.
You, one way or another,
have to pass the firmware image
from user space to the driver.
This can be done in chunks.
It can be done all at
once by having a driver,
by creating a dummy driver that just
contains a property that is the image
that somehow attaches to your driver.
Or you could use set property interface
to put the chunks across one at a time.
You could also even use a user
client to have the chunk of
address space in your user client.
You could use a user client
to have the chunk of address
space in your user client.
You can have your user application
have the entire firmware
image in its memory space,
then you could have your user client map
that address space into the kernel that
your driver could then take advantage of.
Once you're in the driver,
it will write these chunks
into the flash on your card.
You could also have it update
properties so that your application
could have a barbershop poll giving
you a little bit of progress.
And that's pretty much
the basic idea of that.
So we're going to find some examples.
The one thing that we really want
to stress is the first thing you
need to do if you're going to be
writing I/O Kit drivers is you need
to sign up as a Darwin developer.
You need to go to the
publicsource.apple.com website
to find out how to do that.
And in there you can find out how to
get access to everything inside Darwin.
Three things of interest
inside Darwin that's topical to
today's discussion are X and U.
This is the actual kernel's source.
You can find inside here all the headers
and source to various pieces of I/O Kit.
This will be a valuable resource.
It also serves as many examples
for how to do certain things.
I've also been working on an
example generic PCI driver.
Unfortunately, it's not quite done,
but it's got a pretty good going so far.
You can find this in I/O Kit examples,
Kernel, I/O Kit, generic,
and generic PCI.
I will be posting updates or references
on how to find it and status reports
to the Darwin developer mailing list,
so you should all sign up for that.
Additionally,
a couple years ago I wrote a simple
driver for a BrookTree 878 device.
It's one of these devices that has
both a video and an audio function,
and the driver is available inside
Darwin to serve as a somewhat more
complicated example of how to do that.